Move dmprv to bit4 in SDCSR (#83)
riscv-non-isa/riscv-external-debug-security: chapter2.adoc

==== Supervisor Domain Debug Control
The Smsdedbg extension cite:[smmtt] introduces `sdedbgalw` field (bit 7) in CSR <<Sdseccsr,msdcfg>> to control the debuggability of supervisor domains. When `mdbgen`=0, the `sdedbgalw` field determines both the debug allowed privilege modes and the <<dbgaccpriv, debug access privilege>>, as illustrated in <<dbgpriv>>. 

[[dbgaccpriv]]
==== Debug Access Privilege

> The *debug access privilege* is defined as the privilege level granted to the external debugger when performing state accesses via the hart, such as Abstract Commands and Program Buffer execution. Where previously Debug Mode always had access to M-mode state, Debug Mode now accesses registers and memory using *debug access privilege*. Attempts from Debug Mode to access state that requires privilege above *debug access privilege* will fail and set `abstractcs.cmderr` to 3. The *debug access privilege* is derived as shown in <<dbgpriv>>.

Reviewer: Rather than "before" and "now" it would be better to say "In Sdext, Debug Mode has access to M-mode state.  In Sdsec, Debug Mode accesses registers and memory using *debug access privilege*."  Sdext still exists and people can choose to implement it and not implement Sdsec.

Author: Fixed

[cols="15%,15%,35%,35%"]
.External Debug Configuration and Privilege
|============================================

> | mdbgen | sdedbgalw | Debug allowed privilege modes | Debug access privilege 

Reviewer 2: The spec hasn't defined "debug access privilege" yet, and further dmprv can make it different than what is shown here.  Perhaps move this down, and title the last column "Max debug access privilege"?

Reviewer 3: Agree to move down the table. When dmprv is involved, it is always termed with "effective debug access privilege".  Is it okay to keep the column as it is to indicate the canonical debug access privilege?

Reviewer 2: That may be okay, but you should probably make clear that the effective debug access privilege can only be less than or equal to the debug access privilege.  Also, probably should italicize the word effective if italicizing debug access privilege, to make clear that this is different from the regular debug access privilege.

Reviewer 3: > but you should probably make clear that the effective debug access privilege can only be less than or equal to the debug access privilege

Sure, I think it is implied by the fact dmprv only takes effect when mdben=0 and the effective debug access privilege is represented by sstatus.SPP and hststus.SPV. 

Will make effective debug access privilege italic

[[dbgaccpriv]]
==== Debug Access Privilege

> The *debug access privilege* is defined as the privilege level granted to the external debugger when performing state accesses via the hart, such as Abstract Commands and Program Buffer execution. Where previously Debug Mode always had access to M-mode state, Debug Mode now accesses registers and memory using *debug access privilege*. Attempts from Debug Mode to access state that requires privilege above *debug access privilege* will fail and set `abstractcs.cmderr` to 3. The *debug access privilege* is derived as shown in <<dbgpriv>>, and can be modified using `sdcsr.dmprv` as described in <<dmprv>>.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The *debug access privilege* is defined as the privilege level granted to the external debugger when performing state accesses via the hart, such as Abstract Commands and Program Buffer execution. Where previously Debug Mode always had access to M-mode state, Debug Mode now accesses registers and memory using *debug access privilege*. Attempts from Debug Mode to access state that requires privilege above *debug access privilege* will fail and set `abstractcs.cmderr` to 3. The *debug access privilege* is derived as shown in <<dbgpriv>>.
```
Probably we can just remove the last sentence, because `dmprv` and effective debug acces privilege are detailed in following paragraph.

> The `dmprv` field in `sdcsr` modifies the effective *debug access privilege* to memory. When `dmprv`=0, the *debug access privilege* to memory follows <<dbgpriv>>; when `dmprv`=1, the effective *debug access privilege* to memory is represented by `prv` and `v` fields in `dcsr`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `dmprv` field added in `sdcsr` modifies the effective *debug access privilege* to memory in S-mode debugger. When `dmprv`=0, the *debug access privilege* to memory follows <<dbgpriv>>; when `dmprv`=1, the effective *debug access privilege* to memory is represented by `spp` and `spv` fields in `sstatus`. 

[NOTE]
The effective *debug access privilege* to memory in M-mode debugger can  be modified by `dcsr.mprven` and `mstatus.mprv` as specified in The RISC-V Debug Specification cite:[dbgspec].

```

Suggest to:
1. explicitly restrict the `dmprv` affects only S-mode debugger
2. use the `sstatus.spp` and `sstatus.spv` (akin to M-mode) to denote the privilege level

[[dbgaccpriv]]
==== Debug Access Privilege
The *debug access privilege* is defined as the privilege level granted to the external debugger when performing state accesses via the hart, such as Abstract Commands and Program Buffer execution. Where previously Debug Mode always had access to M-mode state, Debug Mode now accesses registers and memory using *debug access privilege*. Attempts from Debug Mode to access state that requires privilege above *debug access privilege* will fail and set `abstractcs.cmderr` to 3. The *debug access privilege* is derived as shown in <<dbgpriv>>.

> The `sdcsr.dmprv` modifies the effective *debug access privilege* to memory in S-mode debugger. When `sdcsr.dmprv`=0, the effective *debug access privilege* to memory follows <<dbgpriv>>; when `sdcsr.dmprv`=1, the effective *debug access privilege* to memory is represented by `sstatus.spp` and `sstatus.spv`. 

Reviewer 3: Makes sense. Will add explicit description and mention that virtual-machine load/store instruction ignore dmprv

> The `sdcsr.dmprv` modifies the effective *debug access privilege* to memory in S-mode debugger. When `sdcsr.dmprv`=0, the effective *debug access privilege* to memory follows <<dbgpriv>>; when `sdcsr.dmprv`=1, the effective *debug access privilege* to memory is represented by `sstatus.spp` and `sstatus.spv`. 

Reviewer 2: I see you added reference to loads and stores, but nothing about effective priv mode insts.

> The `sdcsr.dmprv` modifies the effective *debug access privilege* to memory in S-mode debugger. When `sdcsr.dmprv`=0, the effective *debug access privilege* to memory follows <<dbgpriv>>; when `sdcsr.dmprv`=1, the effective *debug access privilege* to memory is represented by `sstatus.spp` and `sstatus.spv`. 

Reviewer 3: Missed in previous commit, added now.

> `sdcsr.dmprv` only takes effect when `mdbgen` is 0, `sdcsr.dmprv` is 0 when `mdbgen` is 1.

Reviewer 3: "Read-only 0" is avoided here, because it tries to say the actual value of dmprv is 0, rather than masked when mdbgen is 1. Or probably it is better to say "is cleared to 0 when"?

> `sdcsr.dmprv` only takes effect when `mdbgen` is 0, `sdcsr.dmprv` is 0 when `mdbgen` is 1.

Author: Probably better to state `dmprv` does not take effect when `mdbgen` is 1

Bascially what we want is the `sdcsr` register becomes inaccessible to Debug Mode and `dmprv` does not take effect when `mdbgen` is 1.

> `sdcsr.dmprv` only takes effect when `mdbgen` is 0, `sdcsr.dmprv` is 0 when `mdbgen` is 1.

Reviewer 2: Making an S-mode CSR inaccessible to M-mode would be very unusual, I would avoid that.  Better to either say dmprv is ignored when mdbgen=1, or is read-only 0.  I don't think read-only 0 implies that it is masked, but rather the value is 0 and can't be written to 1.

> `sdcsr.dmprv` only takes effect when `mdbgen` is 0, `sdcsr.dmprv` is 0 when `mdbgen` is 1.

Author: lgtm, read-only 0 makes sense

==== Debug Access Privilege
The *debug access privilege* is defined as the privilege level granted to the external debugger when performing state accesses via the hart, such as Abstract Commands and Program Buffer execution. Where previously Debug Mode always had access to M-mode state, Debug Mode now accesses registers and memory using *debug access privilege*. Attempts from Debug Mode to access state that requires privilege above *debug access privilege* will fail and set `abstractcs.cmderr` to 3. The *debug access privilege* is derived as shown in <<dbgpriv>>.

> The `sdcsr.dmprv` modifies the effective *debug access privilege* for load and store in Debug Mode by an S-mode debugger. When `sdcsr.dmprv`=0, the effective *debug access privilege* of memory accesses in Debug Mode follows <<dbgpriv>>; when `sdcsr.dmprv`=1, the effective *debug access privilege* of memory accesses in Debug Mode is represented by `sstatus.spp` and `hstatus.spv`. The `sdcsr.dmprv` only takes effect when `mdbgen` is 0, `sdcsr.dmprv` is 0 when `mdbgen` is 1.

Reviewer 2: "for loads and stores" (plural)

Reviewer: Do we want to be more generic and say "explicit memory accesses"?  AMOs are kind of neither loads nor stores but also both loads and stores.

Reviewer 3: I think it also impacts the implicit memory accesses. Regarding AMO, could we consider it combines a load and a store, and therefore the term "loads and stores" can cover the case of AMO?

Reviewer 2: Interesting discussion.  I notice that the priv spec refers to "loads and stores" executing with the effective priv mode in the MPRV documentation, but the "explicit memory access" executing as though V=1 for HLV/HSV/HLVX.  I suspect this was an unintentional distinction, since, in the latter case, the implicit accesses (like page table reads) will also execute as though V=1.

Reviewer: I suggested explicit memory accesses because that's what loads and stores are.  I agree that any implicit memory accesses as a result of those explicit accesses need to happen with the same permissions as the original explicit accesses.  But I thought that this was implicit. 😄 

However, memory accesses due to instruction fetch are different (for MPRV in normal modes and for Debug Mode fetching the program buffer) so you can't say all memory accesses.

MPRV probably predates the A extension.  Maybe the priv spec definition should change?  Feel free to tell me if I'm just being overzealous in analyzing "effective privilege mode" recently.  Maybe loads and stores is good enough.

|============================================

> The `sdcsr.dmprv` modifies the *effective debug access privilege* for loads and stores in Debug Mode by an S-mode debugger. When `sdcsr.dmprv`=0, the *effective debug access privilege* of memory accesses in Debug Mode follows <<dbgpriv>>; when `sdcsr.dmprv`=1, the *effective debug access privilege* of memory accesses in Debug Mode is represented by `sstatus.spp` and `hstatus.spv`. The 'sdcsr.dmprv' does not affect the virtual-machine load/store instructions, HLV, HLVX, and HSV. The `sdcsr.dmprv` only takes effect when `mdbgen` is 0, and it is read-only 0 when `mdbgen` is 1.

Reviewer 2: One last thing: might be better to replace "memory accesses" with "loads and stores", to make clear that instruction fetches are not impacted.  Admittedly, in debug mode there aren't technically instruction fetches (though some implementations do so under the hood), but just to make sure there is no confusion.

Author: Fixed

[[ssdextcsr]]
==== Extension of Sdext CSR

===== `Sdcsr` and `sdpc`

> The `sdcsr` and `sdpc` registers provide supervisor read/write access to the `dcsr` and `dpc` registers respectively. They are only accessible in Debug Mode. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `sdcsr` and `sdpc` registers provide supervisor read/write access to the `dcsr` and `dpc` registers respectively. Moreover, the `sdcsr` adds `dmprv` to modify effective *debug access privilege* in S-mode debugger. Both registers are only accessible in Debug Mode. 
```

=== CSRs

[[ssdextcsr]]
==== Extension of Debug Mode CSR

> The `dcsr`, `dpc` and `dscratch0/1` are accessible in Debug Mode only if `mdbgen`=1; otherwise, an exception occurs. The `sdcsr` and `sdpc` (see <<smodecsr>>) are accessible in Debug Mode if either `mdbgen`=1 or `sedbgalw`= 1.

Reviewer 2: Exceptions aren't really raised in debug mode, better to say that the access will fail and cmderr=X.

Reviewer 3: sure, accepted

=== CSRs

[[ssdextcsr]]
==== Extension of Debug Mode CSR

> The `dcsr`, `dpc` and `dscratch0/1` are accessible in Debug Mode only if `mdbgen`=1; otherwise, the access will fail and `abstract.cmderr` is set to 3 (exception). The `sdcsr` and `sdpc` (see <<smodecsr>>) are accessible in Debug Mode if either `mdbgen`=1 or `sedbgalw`= 1.

Reviewer: There should be an "otherwise" clause on the second sentence, too.

Author: The exception is not needed now because now sdcsr is accessible when either mdbgen = 1 or sedbgalw = 1 otherwise the hart cannot enter Debug Mode

Reviewer: This assumes that mdbgen doesn't change from 1 to 0 while you're in Debug Mode (and sdedbgalw was already 0).  I have also been assuming that this shouldn't happen but is that something we can assume?  There's a non-normative note that talks about mdbgen changing from 0 to 1 dynamically.  Could it change the other way?  At the worst time while you're in Debug Mode?  It would be very insecure to allow the hart to be in Debug Mode at a time when debugging is disallowed.  Should the spec prohibit mdbgen transitions from 1 to 0?

If changing mdbgen like that is illegal (like I hope it is) then it's simpler to say that sdcsr and sdpc are _always_ accessible in Debug Mode rather than only under certain conditions.

(If this sentence stays for any reason then you have to fix the typo in s**d**edbgalw.)

Author: > This assumes that mdbgen doesn't change from 1 to 0 while you're in Debug Mode (and sdedbgalw was already 0). I have also been assuming that this shouldn't happen but is that something we can assume? There's a non-normative note that talks about mdbgen changing from 0 to 1 dynamically. Could it change the other way? At the worst time while you're in Debug Mode? It would be very insecure to allow the hart to be in Debug Mode at a time when debugging is disallowed. Should the spec prohibit mdbgen transitions from 1 to 0?

Great point. mdbgen shall never be set to 0 while the hart is in Debug Mode and it shall be guaranteed by the controlling entity. Added a new non-normative note to explicitly call out the assumption.

> If this sentence stays for any reason then you have to fix the typo in sdedbgalw.

Fixed.

[[ssdextcsr]]
==== Extension of Sdext CSR

===== `Sdcsr` and `sdpc`

> The `sdcsr` and `sdpc` registers provide supervisor read/write access to the `dcsr` and `dpc` registers respectively. Moreover, the `sdcsr` adds `dmprv` to modify effective *debug access privilege* in S-mode. Both registers are only accessible in Debug Mode. 

Reviewer 2: "adds `dmprv` to modify the effective *debug access privilege* of loads and stores in Debug mode."

=== CSRs

[[ssdextcsr]]
==== Extension of Debug Mode CSR

> The `dcsr`, `dpc` and `dscratch0/1` are accessible in Debug Mode only if `mdbgen`=1; otherwise, the access will fail and `abstract.cmderr` is set to 3 (exception). The `sdcsr` and `sdpc` (see <<smodecsr>>) are accessible in Debug Mode if either `mdbgen`=1 or `sdedbgalw`= 1.

Reviewer: I understand why you don't have an otherwise.  However, there's an otherwise in the first sentence which makes the second sentence's lack of an otherwise very obvious and unexpected since the sentences are so similar.  That is just going to lead to questions like the one that started this conversation.  Given the new assumption, I think that sdcsr and sdpc are always accessible in Debug Mode so I would either say always (which doesn't require an otherwise) or put in an unnecessary otherwise clause.

Author: Makes sense, the "either..." is redundant and unnecessary, removed.

  {bits:   1, name: '0'},
  {bits:   1, name: 'ebreakvu'},
  {bits:   1, name: 'ebreakvs'},
  {bits:   6, name: '0'},
  {bits:   3, name: 'extcause'},
  {bits:   1, name: '0'},
  {bits:   4, name: 'debugver'}
], config:{lanes: 3, hspace:1024}}
....

[NOTE]

> The `nmip`,`stoptime`, `stopcount`, `ebreakm` and `cetrig` fields in `dcsr` are configurable only by M-mode, they are masked in `sdcsr`, while `prv[1]` is hardwired to 0 `sdcsr`.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `nmip`, `mprven`, `stoptime`, `stopcount`, `ebreakm` and `cetrig` fields in `dcsr` are configurable only by M-mode, they are masked in `sdcsr`, while `prv[1]` is hardwired to 0 `sdcsr`. The field for `mprven` is reclaimed by `dmprv` in `sdcsr` layout to avoid waste of fields. 
```
Adding back the `mprven` to suggest it is masked from `sdcsr` and replaced by `dmprv`.

  {bits:   1, name: '0'},
  {bits:   1, name: 'ebreakvu'},
  {bits:   1, name: 'ebreakvs'},
  {bits:   6, name: '0'},
  {bits:   3, name: 'extcause'},
  {bits:   1, name: '0'},
  {bits:   4, name: 'debugver'}
], config:{lanes: 3, hspace:1024}}
....

[NOTE]
The `nmip`, `mprven`, `stoptime`, `stopcount`, `ebreakm` and `cetrig` fields in `dcsr` are configurable only by M-mode, they are masked in `sdcsr`, while `prv[1]` is hardwired to 0 `sdcsr`. The field for `mprven` is reclaimed by `dmprv` in `sdcsr` layout to avoid waste of fields. 

> The `dmprv` is added as bit 4 in `sdcsr` to modify the *debug access privilege* for memory load and store operations, as defined in <<dbgaccpriv>>.  

Reviewer 2: "The `dmprv` *field* is added..." (emphasis mine)

> The maximum privilege level that can be configured in `prv` and `v` is determined in <<maxdbgpriv>>. The fields retain legal values when the `prv` and `v` are configured with an illegal privilege level. Illegal privilege levels include unsupported levels and any level higher than the maximum allowed debug privilege. 

Reviewer 2: Is this paragraph, and the table below, needed anymore?  sstatus.SPP is only 1 bit, so it can't hold M-mode.  And if mdbgen=sdedbgalw=0, then debug mode can't be entered, so don't need to worry about the SPP/SPV value then.  I'd remove both, the restrictions are implicit.

Reviewer 3: The text and table should belongs to `dcsr` rather than `sdcsr`. In Sdext, there are no constraits on `prv` and `v` and it is included with Sdsec. Need to split a `dcsr` section and place the description there.

....

[NOTE]

> The `nmip`, `mprven`, `stoptime`, `stopcount`, `ebreakm` and `cetrig` fields in `dcsr` are configurable only by M-mode, they are masked in `sdcsr`, while `prv[1]` is hardwired to 0 in `sdcsr`. The field for `mprven` is reclaimed by `dmprv` in `sdcsr` layout to avoid waste of fields. 

Reviewer 2: If you think the last sentence is needed, I'd make it non-normative.

Reviewer 3: Yes, the whole paragraph  is in a non-normative note.
